<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
				<p>The Epilogue</p>
			</div>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph" xml:lang="fr">
				<p>“Et je fais sçavoir à tous lecteurs de ce Livret que les choses que je dis avoir vues et sues sont enregistrés icy, afin que vous pouviez les regarder selon vostre bon sens, s’il vous plaist.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p epub:type="bridgehead">Here is appended the epilogue that Messire Nicolas de Caen affixed to the book which he had made according to the best of his ability; and which (in consequence) he dared not appraise.</p>
			<p class="subhead">The Epilogue</p>
			<p class="salutation">A Son Livret</p>
			<p>Intrepidly depart, my little book, into the presence of that most illustrious lady who bade me compile you. Bow down before her judgment. And if her sentence be that of a fiery death, I counsel you not to grieve at what cannot be avoided.</p>
			<p>But, if by any miracle that glorious, strong fortress of the weak consider it advisable that you remain unburned, pass thence, my little book, to every man who may desire to purchase you, and live out your little hour among these very credulous persons; and at your appointed season perish and be forgotten. Thus may you share your betters’ fate, and be at one with those famed comedies of Greek Menander and all the poignant songs of Sappho. <i xml:lang="la">Et quid Pandoniae</i>⁠—thus, little book, I charge you to poultice your more-merited oblivion⁠—<i xml:lang="la">quid Pandoniae restat nisi nomen Athenae</i>?</p>
			<p>Yet even in your brief existence you may chance to meet with those who will affirm that the stories you narrate are not true and protest assertions which are only fables. To these you will reply that I, your maker, was in my youth the quite unworthy servant of the most high and noble lady, Dame Jehane, and in this period, at and about her house of Havering-Bower, conversed in my own person with Dame Katharine, then happily remarried to a private gentleman of Wales; and so obtained the matter of the ninth story and of the tenth authentically. You will say also that Messire de Montbrison afforded me the main matter of the sixth and seventh stories, and many of the songs which this book contains; and that, moreover, I once journeyed to Caer Idion and talked for some two hours with Richard Holland (whom I found a very old and garrulous and cheery person), and got of him the matter of the eighth tale in this dizain, together with much information as concerns the sixth and the seventh. And you will add that the matter of the fourth and fifth tales was in every detail related to me by my most illustrious mistress, Madame Isabella of Portugal, who had this information from her mother, an equally veracious and immaculate lady, and one that was in youth Dame Philippa’s most dear associate. For the rest you must admit, unwillingly, the first three stories in this book to be a thought less solidly confirmed; although (as you will say) even in these histories I have not ever deviated from what was at odd times narrated to me by the aforementioned persons, and have always endeavored honestly to piece together that which they told me.</p>
			<p>I have pieced together these tales about the women who intermarried, not very enviably, with the demon-tainted blood of Edward Longshanks, because it seems to me that these tales, when they are rightly considered, compose the initial portion of a troubling history. Whether (as some declare) the taint came from Manuel of Poictesme, or whether (as yet others say) this poison was inherited from the demon wife whom Foulques Plantagenet fetched out of hell, the blood in these men was not all human. These men might not tread equally with human beings: their wives suffered therefor, just as they that had inherited this blood suffered therefor, and all England suffered therefor. And the upshot of it I have narrated elsewhere, in the book called and entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Red Cuckold</i>, which composes the final portion of this history, and tells of the last spilling and of the extinction of this blood.</p>
			<p>Also, my little book, you will encounter more malignant people who will jeer at you, and will say that you and I have cheated them of your purchase-money. To these you will reply, with Plutarch, <i xml:lang="la">Non mi aurum posco, nec mi pretium</i>. Secondly you will say that, of necessity, the tailor cuts the coat according to his cloth; and that he cannot undertake to robe an Ephialtes or a towering Orion suitably when the resources of his shop amount to only a few yards of cambric. Indeed had I the power to make you better, my little book, I would have exercised that power to the utmost. A good conscience is a continual feast, and I summon high Heaven to be my witness that had I been Homer you had awed the world, another Iliad. I lament your inability to do this, as heartily as any person living; yet Heaven willed it; and it is in consequence to Heaven these aforementioned cavillers should rightfully complain.</p>
			<p>So to such impious people do you make no answer at all, unless indeed you should elect to answer them by repetition of this song which I now make for you, my little book, at your departure from me. And the song runs in this fashion:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Depart, depart, my book! and live and die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dependent on the idle fantasy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men who cannot view you, quite, as I.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">For I am fond, and willingly mistake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My book to be the book I meant to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cannot judge you, for that phantom’s sake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Yet pardon me if I have wrought too ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In making you, that never spared the will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shape you perfectly, and lacked the skill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Ah, had I but the power, my book, then I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had wrought in you some wizardry so high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no man but had listened⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">They pass by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shrug⁠—as we, who know that unto us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It has been granted never to fare thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never to be strong and glorious.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Is it denied me to perpetuate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What so much loving labor did create?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hear Oblivion tap upon the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And acquiesce, not all disconsolate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">For I have got such recompense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Of that high-hearted excellence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Which the contented craftsman knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Alone, that to loved labor goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And daily does the work he chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And counts all else impertinence!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p xml:lang="la">
				<b>Explicit Decas Reginarum</b>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
